There's a reason to remember the past,
for there we may find the truth and courage to move on.
Ladies Who Launch organized
"Never Again: Voices of Martial Law"
in Bantayog ng mga Bayani last September 2016.
Nine stories. Majority of these
are based on real life accounts.
One of these is Indigo Child.
This play-on video was made possible
with the help of the following:
UP Film Institute, Ladies Who Launch
Bantayog ng mga Bayani, Rey Agapay
It wasn’t lighting that showed man
the concept of electricity.
Lightning then,
was a sign of the wrath of gods.
But for us who live in this hi-tech age,
it’s easy to think of lightning as electricity.
They say that lightning
was first trapped in a kite.
And that was how we learned
to create electricity.
Since then, humans became powerful.
We could make things work and move.
Light,
cars,
other forms of transportation,
communication,
everything.
We created cities,
an entire world brought to life
by electricity.
Civilizations weren’t founded
on fire any longer.
From the rapid flow of electricity,
machines were created.
And soon, computers, robots.
We’ve created a planet
that lights up even at night
I wasn’t aware back then.
But now that I’m going to see Mama,
I realized that maybe the reason
I took up Electrical Engineering was…
because of her.
Not Benjamin Franklin,
nor Michael Faraday, nor Thomas Edison,
not even Albert Einstein.
Perhaps no one else knows more
about electricity than my own mother.
When I first saw her
three weeks ago,
she was still in shock.
Doctors advised me
to visit some other time.
They told me she might not be ready…
or maybe, I won’t be ready to see her.
But I told them I can handle it.
I can see my mother
even if she’s spaced out.
Mama.
She hasn’t regained
full control of her mouth.
She was still in shock.
She almost didn’t recognize me.
Her eyes were dull.
Ma.
Careful.
I’m here.
Ma.
I'm here.
Jerome is here
Jerome.
Jerome!
Of course, I know you.
- Are you fetching me?
- Ma.
I thought I was going to get shocked
by electricity myself.
What did you think
I just thought--
there might still be
electricity left in your body.
Like this.
Crazy.
What do you think of me?
You can take anything.
I thought that maybe--
after your body
has absorbed the electricity,
you could light up a bulb.
How I wish.
So we don’t have to pay
the electric bill.
She could afford to make jokes
three days after her ECT.
I was relieved,
that way we didn’t need
to talk about serious stuff.
I figured
she remembered the procedure
she just went through.
What are we talking about?
What did you say, Ma?
Weren’t you conscious?
Conscious?
Of what?
What you went through...
What do you mean?
Electroconvulsive therapy?
Electroconvulsive thera...
Oh!
Is that what it was?
At that time, I thought
the memories were just coming back.
Like
flash photography.
That's it!
Like
flash photography.
Here
in my head.
That’s what I remembered.
Was it painful?
Painful?
Which one?
The flashes of memories?
They were painful.
So they gave me the electric shock.
You rascal.
Why didn’t you tell me?
Did I agree to it?
We discussed it.
I told you it’d be good for you.
I don’t remember giving my consent.
That was Dr. Medina’s recommendation.
Why do they like burning people's insides?
I couldn’t stop you.
You were doing all sorts of things to yourself.
Why do they like burning me inside?
You haven’t been responding to the medication.
Besides, it was just a one-time treatment.
Of course not.
This is the second time.
Ma? You’re mistaken--
No.
This is the second time.
Only, the first one took longer.
And I wasn’t unconscious then.
Which is why this time,
all the memories came flashing back.
I thought they’ve really come back.
They?
Kidlat (Lightning).
Kidlat.
They named him Kidlat.
At first I didn’t know why, until..
Ma.
It was Kidlat who would attach
the wires to my toes.
Sometimes he’d attach them to my fingers.
Other times, to my ears.
My nipples.
My vagina.
My…
So that’s why...
his face suddenly flashed in my mind.
I suddenly remembered everything.
Even that.
That!
Even the mole on his forehead,
I remembered.
I used to stare at his mole...
hoping that if I did,
the shock wouldn’t be so painful.
Did my nose bleed?
I don’t know.
What did the doctor say?
He didn’t mention anything.
Because it bled the first time.
Then I saw Kidlat,
he got momentarily anxious.
Of course, because
if my organs got fried,
I’d instantly die, right?
So I didn’t remove my eyes on his mole.
That scared him a little.
And he stopped.
Ma... I’m sorry.
Sorry, Ma.
I had no idea
it would trigger bad memories--
It’s not your fault, son.
I did have second thoughts
before agreeing to it.
When Dr. Medina suggested
shock therapy, I got scared, too.
I didn’t think these memories would...
Maybe it was necessary.
You know...
That’s what they called it, too.
Which one?
"Shock therapy."
Kidlat said
that we were sick.
Terribly sick.
A sickness called ca--
Cancer.
Fucking shit. That bastard.
They said I had a tumor in my brain.
They needed to burn all that
communist dogma they put in my brain.
That was the mission order.
"Discipline is necessary!"
Discipline!
They had to get it out of...
our system…
system…
It was a war of opposing systems.
The system we were advocating
against the system they were protecting.
They repeated it over and over.
It left me in a daze.
That’s why I repeated
a different mantra in my head.
Louder and louder.
“Stupid jerks! American puppets!"
"Down with imperialism!"
"Down with feudalism!"
"Down with kutukatak-ism..."
I heard that at a rally once...
You know those young cigarette vendors?
"Takatak boys."
One of them chanted,
“Down with Kutukatak-ism!”
Did I tell him that? I don’t recall now.
All I know was that I remained brave
even if I was getting delirious.
“You don’t have a system!"
"Down with all of you,
you stupid puppets!”
Wow!
I sound like a true activist eh?
Ma...do you want us to talk another time?
Why?
All these bad memories are--
Stay right there!
I’ve buried these memories for so long.
Fucking shit!
But they’re still in my head.
I thought that all along,
these memories have...
dissipated.
Do you remember the teachings
of Sri Abundoramiswamy?
Tani!
You don't know him.
Tani was a comrade.
After our release from prison,
his name was still Tani.
Your father told me
Tani didn’t want to go back to the movement.
So I asked him why.
He stared at me.
Your father...
Your father told me he understands.
He said Tani lost his manhood in prison.
What do you mean?
I didn’t know either.
But I had my suspicions.
After a couple of years,
we met again.
Your father had already passed away.
And me,
I was seen walking
like a zombie on the street.
I was discharged from the movement.
Someone was just
looking out for me.
You must have been 12
years old at that time...
You didn’t share that with me.
Of course,
I didn’t tell you anything.
I didn’t tell anyone about this.
Why?
I always asked you, didn’t I?
How did my father die?
You already know that.
Bang!
He was shot.
Dead.
That’s how I wanted to die back then.
Together with your father.
There was a time in my life...
No,
Our lives...
I didn’t know whether...
we were already in hell
or we were just on our way.
I asked your father
if we’re already in hell,
then what’s the difference?
We were going to die
and end up there anyway.
Dad wasn’t like that!
Grandma didn’t talk about him that way.
You’re right.
Your father said...
Heaven...
He said to die for the country is Heaven.
I thought dying then never felt more tempting.
Ma, you must be tired.
Are you out of your mind?
Can’t you see how excited I am
to tell you all this?
Once the shock therapy’s effects wane,
I’ll forget all this.
I won’t be able to tell you the stories.
Now’s the right time.
Tani...
I saw him again.
"Tani!" I called.
I called him but he just looked at me and said,
“I am not Tani."
"My name is Sri Abundoramiswamy.”
What the fuck!
He went to India
to search for his Self, he said.
And when he found his wounded self,
he finally killed it
and laid it to rest.
“Tani’s dead”, he said.
Here, now, is Sri Abundoramiswamy.
New soul,
bought from India at the price
of thirty meditation sessions...
I was impressed. I told him,
"Teacher,"
"teach me."
And he taught me
how to contemplate on my trauma
using the eye of my inner consciousness.
Every whack,
every shock,
every strike,
I meditated on each one of them.
Including Kidlat’s mole.
I meditated and afterwards,
I saw how they slowly dissipated.
I saw them melt
and turn into
smoke.
Bye!
I bid all the bad memories goodbye.
I was so sure they were all gone.
That’s why when I looked for you
and took you from your grandmother,
I swear,
I didn’t remember anything, son.
"Well and good," I said.
I could take you far away.
To protect you.
Whatever happened to your father and I…
is between us.
All you need to know...
was we fought for our country.
Your father died for the motherland.
I...
was tortured for the motherland.
That’s why.
You took me away from Grandma.
You took me away from everyone.
Including your comrades.
You said
that it was just the two of us.
Like this.
You took me away.
From your past. From history.
Even though we both knew
it was impossible.
You even changed your name.
Do you remember?
I was 15 when you told me...
- To call you Felisa.
- Felisa.
Ma, not Nanay.
Because every time you called me that,
an electric current went right through me.
I wanted to forget everything,
even my name.
You knew that, right?
Do you still remember
your real name, Ma?
I know it’s just there
at the back of my head.
Do you want to remember?
Don’t you dare mention it if you know.
Sorry.
Nanay!
Didn’t Dr. Medina say
that this was going to be the side effect?
They fried my brain...
naturally, that opened
doors and windows.
Everything started coming back.
Do you know?
What I remembered
while Kidlat was electrocuting me?
In the midst of all that pain,
I remembered...
being kissed by a man.
Can you imagine?
I was just a baby and yet
I already had that in my memory.
That must have been
my earliest recollection.
I was in someone’s arms.
Maybe Mama’s or Papa’s.
And then, there was a man
who couldn’t help himself
He was so delighted with me.
He kissed me.
For a moment...
for a moment I felt the joy
of being kissed without asking for it.
That feeling of...
surprise
and joy.
Then I felt shame.
Then I...
cried
and cried
and cried.
But when I was being tortured with a live wire,
when I was trembling
because of the high voltage,
I was brought back
to that single moment of utter joy.
The feeling that came
after surprise and before shame.
I stayed in that moment
until the electricity
went out of my body.
That’s why Kidlat was astonished.
He said I was already unconscious
but I was still smiling.
Where is he?
What?
Don’t you remember?
The man?
I don't know.
But I remember his face.
Kidlat.
Did you see him again after your release?
After Martial Law?  Not even once?
On TV.
On TV?
When Marcos fled.
He was shaking hands
with the people in EDSA.
He had flowers on his beret.
He and his comrades
were hailed as heroes.
People said what they did
was also for our country.
Who is Kidlat?
One of those
who broke away from Marcos.
What’s his name?
What for?
I just want his memory to dissipate.
Didn’t you try looking for him afterwards?
No. We were far away from it already.
I didn’t want to see him.
- Did Dad know him?
- Of course. Your dad knew everything.
Why didn’t Dad look for him?
Because I told him not to!
He’s already dead to me anyway!
Stop playing dumb, Ma!
You know you can’t forget that man
because he’s the one who made you like this!
Ma!
In the end...
I turned out like this because...
I couldn’t handle myself.
In spite of...
meditating...
therapy, medicine...
trying to make
everything about him dissipate...
I still can’t...
I still can't make it disappear.
And now...
Now that they've burned my insides again,
he has returned.
He’s still alive.
There’s a meaning
behind all these.
You know?
Situations like this...
They happen for a reason.
The reason I remember...
and in your presence…
That’s it!
I’ve got it, my son.
That’s why I can’t get it out of my mind.
In spite of all my efforts.
Why I didn’t divulge this to anyone was because...
it was waiting to be told.
And not just to anyone.
But to you.
My son.
Ma.
Even if you didn’t tell me,
you think I didn’t know?
I knew.
Even when we had moved away.
And you refused
to contact your comrades.
Even Grandma.
I found out on my own.
I know you were tortured, Ma.
Maybe I don’t know every detail.
But Ma...
There are people
who haven’t forgotten.
There were people
who recorded the facts...
recorded the details in history.
Stored in the memory banks
of many people...
Your friends.
The people you left behind…
They know and I know.
And I want to tell you...I love you.
And that I’ve admired you
from the start.
Even if I don’t fully understand
what you and dad went through.
They didn’t tell you.
No one can tell the true story.
Only I can.
He’s not your father.
You wouldn’t have become an indigo child,
if he were your father.
Indigo?
I only found out
when I got you back.
That was what
Abundoramiswamy said.
You are...
an Indigo Child.
You will break the chains
of non-stop misery...
suffering...
ignorance...
shallowness.
You will rescue all of humanity
who has fallen
into the quagmire of the past.
You are part of the new generation.
That will open a new chapter.
From the Age of Pisces
to the Age of Aquarius.
And this is your time.
- Ma.
- You,
together with other indigo children...
borne of a revolution,
fruit of conflict,
of rage, of crisis...
you will raise
people’s consciousness.
and shepherd people
when we cross the light band…
towards the age
of new consciousness
that’s more evolved...
more developed...
more aware...
Ma...
What do you mean?
Now it all makes sense...
why we reached this point, Jerome.
Jerome, my son.
It was a big mistake
that I hid all these from you.
Because you!
You are the fruit of all my hatred...
Who is my father?
Kidlat.
I carried you.
Debating every day...
whether I should abort you or not.
I consulted the movement.
Some said it was alright for me
to have an abortion.
They wouldn’t condemn me.
They would understand.
And your father said...
He’d respect my decision.
If I decide to keep you,
he’d take care of you.
He said we can teach you
to hate the soldiers.
Who knows?
He said.
By a sudden dramatic turn of events,
you might end up
killing your own father.
I told your father...
who by the way is not your real father...
I killed Kidlat a long time ago.
Here.
And that was when
Abundoramiswamy and I realized...
that you,
child of arch-enemies...
is the symbol of its ultimate union...
The synthesis of opposing forces...
You are the indigo child
will open a new consciousness.
Oh
my
God!
My
What a revelation!
What a revelation, indeed.
I feel...
I feel liberated,
I feel fantastic release.
It is as if I reached
a spiritual climax.
- You know?
- Ma.
- If Abundoramiswamy were here, he’d be so happy.
Where is he?
I don’t know.
Where’s Kidlat!
I’m going to look for him.
Jerome.
Ma...
You are a child of conflict...
But I have learned to love you.
Now, son, go and look
for your fellow Indigos.
As for me…
I’m finally free.
They won’t let you go, Ma.
Just like that.
I let her be.
After a few weeks, Dr. Medina said
the shock therapy was a big help.
She said in a few weeks,
Mama could go home.
Just like that.
After a few days,
they couldn’t find my mom.
One night, she just disappeared.
There was a massive brownout then.
Someone messed up the Luzon grid.
The city lost power for a couple of hours.
And when the lights came back,
my mom was gone.
Just like that.
She was gone.
I couldn’t find her anymore.
And so, I looked for Kidlat instead.
When I found him,
I confronted him.
I asked him if he remembers Felisa.
He said he doesn’t know anyone
by that name.
So I told him.
I recounted to him
what he did to my mother.
How he hurt and destroyed her.
He kept shaking his head.
He insisted that he did not know Felisa.
Then, I remembered.
I remembered and told my father
the real name of my mother.
He was stunned.
I silenced this Kidlat
who was sitting in a wheelchair,
His legs amputated
due to gangrene caused by diabetes.
I silenced him.
And then I told him,
"Remember my mother’s name
until your last breath."
Her name is Adora.